# The Basics of the Language

Welcome to the fourth Nix pill. In the [previous
article](#enter-environment) we learned about Nix environments. We
installed software as a user, managed their profile, switched between
generations, and queried the Nix store. Those are the very basics of
system administration using Nix.

The [Nix
language](http://nixos.org/nix/manual/#chap-writing-nix-expressions) is
used to write expressions that produce derivations. The
[nix-build](http://nixos.org/nix/manual/#sec-nix-build) tool is used to
build derivations from an expression. Even as a system administrator
that wants to customize the installation, it's necessary to master Nix.
Using Nix for your jobs means you get the features we saw in the
previous articles for free.

The syntax of Nix is quite unfamiliar, so looking at existing examples
may lead you to think that there's a lot of magic happening. In reality,
it's mostly about writing utility functions to make things convenient.

On the other hand, the same syntax is great for describing packages, so
learning the language itself will pay off when writing package
expressions.

<div class="important">

In Nix, everything is an expression, there are no statements. This is
common in functional languages.

</div>

<div class="important">

Values in Nix are immutable.

</div>

## Value types

Nix 2.0 contains a command named `nix repl` which is a simple command
line tool for playing with the Nix language. In fact, Nix is a [pure,
lazy, functional
language](https://nixos.org/nix/manual/#ch-expression-language), not
only a set of tools to manage derivations. The `nix repl` syntax is
slightly different to Nix syntax when it comes to assigning variables,
but it shouldn't be confusing so long as you bear it in mind. I prefer
to start with `nix repl` before cluttering your mind with more complex
expressions.

Launch `nix repl`. First of all, Nix supports basic arithmetic
operations: `+`, `-`, `*` and `/`. (To exit `nix repl`, use the command
`:q`. Help is available through the `:?` command.)

Attempting to perform division in Nix can lead to some surprises.

What happened? Recall that Nix is not a general purpose language, it's a
domain-specific language for writing packages. Integer division isn't
actually that useful when writing package expressions. Nix parsed `6/3`
as a relative path to the current directory. To get Nix to perform
division instead, leave a space after the `/`. Alternatively, you can
use `builtins.div`.

Other operators are `||`, `&&` and `!` for booleans, and relational
operators such as `!=`, `==`, `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=`. In Nix, `<`, `>`,
`<=` and `>=` are not much used. There are also other operators we will
see in the course of this series.

Nix has integer, floating point, string, path, boolean and null
[simple](http://nixos.org/nix/manual/#ssec-values) types. Then there are
also lists, sets and functions. These types are enough to build an
operating system.

Nix is strongly typed, but it's not statically typed. That is, you
cannot mix strings and integers, you must first do the conversion.

As demonstrated above, expressions will be parsed as paths as long as
there's a slash not followed by a space. Therefore to specify the
current directory, use `./.` In addition, Nix also parses urls
specially.

Not all urls or paths can be parsed this way. If a syntax error occurs,
it's still possible to fallback to plain strings. Literal urls and paths
are convenient for additional safety.

## Identifier

There's not much to say here, except that dash (`-`) is allowed in
identifiers. That's convenient since many packages use dash in their
names. In fact:

As you can see, `a-b` is parsed as identifier, not as a subtraction.

## Strings

It's important to understand the syntax for strings. When learning to
read Nix expressions, you may find dollars (`$`) ambiguous, but they are
very important . Strings are enclosed by double quotes (`"`), or two
single quotes (`''`).

In other languages like Python you can also use single quotes for
strings (e.g. `'foo'`), but not in Nix.

It's possible to [interpolate](http://nixos.org/nix/manual/#ssec-values)
whole Nix expressions inside strings with the `${...}` syntax and only
that syntax, not `$foo` or `{$foo}` or anything else.

Note: ignore the `foo = "strval"` assignment, special syntax in
`nix repl`.

As said previously, you cannot mix integers and strings. You need to
explicitly include conversions. We'll see this later: function calls are
another story.

Using the syntax with two single quotes is useful for writing double
quotes inside strings without needing to escape them:

Escaping `${...}` within double quoted strings is done with the
backslash. Within two single quotes, it's done with `''`:

## Lists

Lists are a sequence of expressions delimited by space (*not* comma):

Lists, like everything else in Nix, are immutable. Adding or removing
elements from a list is possible, but will return a new list.

## Attribute sets

Attribute sets are an association between string keys and a Nix values.
Keys can only be strings. When writing attribute sets you can also use
unquoted identifiers as keys.

For those reading Nix expressions from nixpkgs: do not confuse attribute
sets with argument sets used in functions.

To access elements in the attribute set:

Yes, you can use strings to address keys which aren't valid identifiers.

Inside an attribute set you cannot normally refer to elements of the
same attribute set:

To do so, use [recursive attribute
sets](https://nixos.org/nix/manual/#idm140737322044432):

This is very convenient when defining packages, which tend to be
recursive attribute sets.

## If expressions

These are expressions, not statements.

You can't have only the `then` branch, you must specify also the `else`
branch, because an expression must have a value in all cases.

## Let expressions

This kind of expression is used to define local variables for inner
expressions.

The syntax is: first assign variables, then `in`, then an expression
which can use the defined variables. The value of the whole `let`
expression will be the value of the expression after the `in`.

Let's write two `let` expressions, one inside the other:

With `let` you cannot assign twice to the same variable. However, you
can shadow outer variables:

You cannot refer to variables in a `let` expression outside of it:

You can refer to variables in the `let` expression when assigning
variables, like with recursive attribute sets:

So beware when you want to refer to a variable from the outer scope, but
it's also defined in the current let expression. The same applies to
recursive attribute sets.

## With expression

This kind of expression is something you rarely see in other languages.
You can think of it like a more granular version of `using` from C++, or
`from module import *` from Python. You decide per-expression when to
include symbols into the scope.

That's it, it takes an attribute set and includes symbols from it in the
scope of the inner expression. Of course, only valid identifiers from
the keys of the set will be included. If a symbol exists in the outer
scope and would also be introduced by the `with`, it will *not* be
shadowed. You can however still refer to the attribute set:

## Laziness

Nix evaluates expressions only when needed. This is a great feature when
working with packages.

Since `a` is not needed, there's no error about division by zero,
because the expression is not in need to be evaluated. That's why we can
have all the packages defined on demand, yet have access to specific
packages very quickly.

## Next pill

...we will talk about functions and imports. In this pill I've tried to
avoid function calls as much as possible, otherwise the post would have
been too long.
